= Hire slow & fire fast =

Have you ever worked in a place that is not good at fireing people when needed?
Have you ever worked in a place where the company don't have any entrance bar?
Both scenarios are bad.

I heard this phrase from a fantastic Head of HR and at first I have to confess the verb *fire* followed by _fast_ was a shock to me.
But if you think about it, it is actually the right way to grow a team.

== Hire slow ==
It is important to invest time during the recruiting process.
If you are not sure about a candidate, schedule another interview to validate your doubts.
There are some red-flags that still bothering you, discuss that with the candidate.
Not sure if someone will work well in your company culture? Probably you should pass this candidate.
The Hiring Manager has the reponsibility of preventing the entrance of someone who can potentialy reduce the performance of a working team.

=== How to interview ===
I like to interview with concrete past experience.
Instead of asking: _What would you do if..._ I prefer to ask _Tell me about a time when..._
It is way hard to sustain a lie about an specific past scenario then to lie about a supposition potential scenario.
To be fair, the person might actually believe s/her would do the right think all the time :/

== Fire fast ==
Don't be afraid to use your probation time to identify if a person will not be able to perform to their full capacity.
If you have to invest most of your "people" time with a single person, because of their performance, then you are past the firing point.
If you as a Hiring Manager don't believe the person can ever recover from their bad performance, then it is time to let that person go.
The damage that a low performer have is enourmous
